---
layout: post
title: Release 2.6.2
author: Christoph Deppisch
categories: [release]
version: 2.6.2
---

Citrus 2.6.2 comes with a set of improvements and features. A big **THANK YOU** to all people out there using Citrus framework making it better with
feedback and new ideas. We have lots of improvements that are based on user input. Please keep that great contribution of your thoughts and have a look at 
the following change set delivered with version 2.6.2.

### Gzip compression

Citrus now supports Gzip message compression. For Http client server endpoints we introduced special compression filters that automatically tak care on compression
when the http header **Accept-Encoding=gzip** or **Content-Encoding=gzip** is set. For other endpoints we introduced the message type **gzip** and the message validator
**gzip-base64** which automatically compresses and decompresses message payloads and enables base64 String comparison for validation purpose. The new compression features are
described in [http](http) and [validation-gzip](/reference/html/index.html#validation-gzip).

### Custom servlet filters

The Citrus http server component now accepts custom servlet filter implementations. This is useful for implementing custom logic on request/response processing such as
automatic message compression or caching. You can set one or many custom filter implementations and map those to request paths for the server. Read about this in chapter [http](/reference/html/index.html#http).

### Escape test variable syntax

Citrus uses test variables and looks for the expressions of type **${variable-name}**. Now when this same syntax is part of a message content we run into errors as Citrus
wants to find a test variable. At the end Citrus complains about the unknown variable. Therefore we introduced an escape syntax for variables so you can skip the Citrus variable expression evaluation.
You can do this by using **${//escaped//}** syntax. Read more about this in [test-variables](/reference/html/index.html#test-variables).

### Configurable XML serializer

We often deal with XML message format and therefore need to parse and serialize XML data. The default XML serializer uses **pretty print** format and **cdata section** support. Now
sometimes it is mandatory to customize these settings which is possible with the new version. You can add a custom XML serializer in the Spring application context and Citrus will automatically use this
implementation and configuration. You can see how it works in chapter [validation-xml](/reference/html/index.html#validation-xml).

### Local message store

We introduced a local message store that automatically saves all exchanged messages (inbound and outbound). This message store can be used to get exchanged messages during and after the test.
Test actions as well as test listeners can access the local message store. Read more about this in chapters [endpoints](/reference/html/index.html#endpoints), [actions-send](/reference/html/index.html#actions-send) and [actions-receive](/reference/html/index.html#actions-receive).

### Wait message condition

The wait test action has a new condition. Besides waiting for files to exist and http requests to be responded you can now wait for messages in the local message store. This way you 
can wait for a certain message to arrive. This is described in chapter [actions-wait](/reference/html/index.html#actions-wait).

### Xpath and JsonPath Function

There are new functions available to evaluate some Xpath or JsonPath expression on a XML/Json source. The source can be a static structure coming from an external file or a message payload stored in the local 
storage. See how to use this functions in chapter [functions](/reference/html/index.html#functions).

### Static response adapter variables support

Server components can use static response adapters that automatically send response messages to any calling client. The response adapter is now able to use test variables and functions. In addition to that
you can map values from the actual request message that has triggered the response adapter by using the local message store in combination with Xpath or JsonPath. Read about this in [endpoint-adapter](/reference/html/index.html#endpoint-adapter).