---
layout: post
title: Release 2.6
author: Christoph Deppisch
categories: [release]
version: 2.6
---

Citrus 2.6 comes with a set of new modules that enable completely new aspects of integration testing. Namely these are 
the new modules for Cucumber behavior driven development and Zookeeper support. Just have a look at the following 
features that are shipped within the 2.6 box.

## Cucumber BDD support

Behavior driven development is more and more coming up also in the integration testing environment. Cucumber is a fantastic 
behavior driven development library that provides support for BDD concepts with Gherkin. The new Citrus integration with 
Cucumber enables the mix of Gherkin syntax feature scenarios with Citrus test case execution. You write feature stories as 
usual and create Citrus test cases with lots of actions for the integration test. See details for this feature in 
[Cucumber BDD support](/reference/html/index.html#cucumber).

## Zookeeper support

Zookeeper from Apache lets you manage configuration with distributed coordination. As a user you create and edit values 
on a Zookeeper server. Other clients then can retrieve this information. With Citrus you are able to access this information 
from within a test case. The Zookeeper Citrus client lets you manage information on the Zookeeper server. See details for 
this feature in [Zookeeper support](/reference/html/index.html#zookeeper).

## Spring Restdocs support

Restdocs is a fantastic way of generating documentation for RESTful APIs. While exchanging request/response data with the 
server Restdocs creates documentation information on the data. The documentation includes field descriptions, headers and 
snippets for body content. With new Citrus version Http clients in Citrus can add Restdoc interceptors that generate the 
documentation while executing the test cases. This way you are able to document what messages were exchanged in tests. 
The Restdocs support is also available for the SOAP Http client in Citrus. See details in [RestDocs](/reference/html/index.html#restdocs).

## Hamcrest matcher conditions

Iterating test action containers in Citrus evaluate boolean expressions for determination of how to execute the nested 
actions in a loop. Also the conditional container executes nested actions based on boolean expression evaluation. The 
Citrus boolean expression support is limited to very basic operations such as lower than or greater than. Furthermore the 
combination of boolean expressions with variables has not been supported. Following from that we have improved the boolean 
expression evaluation mechanism with extension to Hamcrest matchers. So now you can evaluate matchers in iterating conditions. 
This feature is described in sections [Conditional](/reference/html/index.html#containers-conditional) and 
[Iterate](/reference/html/index.html#containers-iterate).

## SOAP Java DSL

Citrus provides a new Java fluent API for sending and receiving SOAP related message content. The Java DSL enhancements 
are based on those of Http. Now you can define SOAP messages with special SOAP action headers more easily. On top of that 
you can handle SOAP faults on client and server with the fluent API. Checkout [SOAP](/reference/html/index.html#soap-webservices) 
for details.

## Refactoring

Refactoring in terms of simplification and standardization is part of our daily life as a developer. We have been working 
on improving the Java DSL fluent API for SOAP. We also introduced a more common way of handling the test action containers 
like iterate, parallel and so on. This leads to some classes and methods that were marked as deprecated. So please have a 
look at your Java DSL code and if you see some usage of deprecated stuff please use the new approaches as soon as possible. 
The deprecated stuff will definitely disappear in upcoming releases.

Some of the changes that we have made might hit you right away. These changes are:

- ws:assert element in SOAP testcase schema has been renamed to ws:assert-fault. This was done for better interoperability 
  reasons with assert action in core schema and to be compliant to send-fault action.
- Java DSL module has had Maven dependencies to several other modules in Citrus (e.g. citrus-jms, citrus-soap). These 
  dependencies were declared as compile dependencies, which is not very nice as you might not need JMS or SOAP functionalities 
  in your project. We have added optional and provided markers to that dependencies which means that you have to decide 
  in your project which of the modules to include. You may face some missing dependencies errors when running the Maven project. 
  As a result you need to include the Citrus modules (e.g. citrus-http, citrus-docker, and so on) in your project Maven POM explicitly.